I've often said that I don't believe government has the
answer to every problem, or that it can do all things for
all people. We're a nation built on
the strength of individual initiative.
But there's certain things that we can't do on our own.
There's certain things only government can do.
And one of those things is ensuring that the
foods we eat and the medicines we take are safe
and don't cause us harm. That's the mission
of our Food and Drug Administration and it is a mission
shared by our Department of Agriculture, and a variety
of other agencies and offices
at just about every level of government.
The men and women who inspect our foods and test the safety
of our medicines are chemists and
physicians, veterinarians and pharmacists.
It's because of the work they do each and every day that
the United States is one of the safest places in the world
to buy groceries at a supermarket or pills at a drugstore.
Unlike citizens of so many other countries, Americans can trust
that there is a strong system in place to ensure that the
medications we give our children will help them get better,
not make them sick; and that a family dinner
won't end in a trip to the doctor's office.
But in recent years, we've seen a number of problems with
the food making its way to our kitchen tables.
In 2006, it was contaminated spinach.
In 2008, it was salmonella in peppers and possibly tomatoes.
And just this year, bad peanut products led to hundreds
of illnesses and cost nine people their lives --
a painful reminder of how tragic the consequences can be when
food producers act irresponsibly
and government is unable to do its job.
Worse, these incidents reflect a troubling trend that's
seen the average number of outbreaks from contaminated produce
and other foods grow to nearly 350 a year --
up from 100 a year in the early 1990s.
Part of the reason is that many of the laws and regulations
governing food safety in America have not been updated since
they were written in the time of Teddy Roosevelt.
It's also because our system of inspection and enforcement
is spread out so widely among so many people that it's difficult
for different parts of our government
to share information, work together, and solve problems.
And it's also because the FDA has been underfunded and understaffed
in recent years, leaving the agency with the resources to inspect
just 7,000 of our 150,000 food processing plants and warehouses
each year. That means roughly 95 percent of them go uninspected.
That's a hazard to public health. It's unacceptable.
And it will change under the leadership of Dr. Margaret Hamburg,
whom I'm appointing today as Commissioner
of the Food and Drug Administration.
From her research on infectious disease at the National Institutes
of Health to her work on public health at the Department of Health
and Human Services, to her leadership on biodefense at the Nuclear
Threat Initiative, Dr. Hamburg brings to this vital position
not only a reputation of integrity but a record of achievement
in making Americans safer and more secure. Dr. Hamburg was one of
the youngest people ever elected to the National Academy of Sciences'
Institute of Medicine. And her two children have a unique distinction
of their own. Their birth certificates feature her name twice --
once as their mother, and once as New York City Health Commissioner.
In that role, Dr. Hamburg brought a new life to a demoralized agency,
leading an internationally-recognized initiative that cut the
tuberculosis rate by nearly half, and overseeing
food safety in our nation's largest city.
Joining her as Principal Deputy Commissioner will be Dr. Joshua Sharfstein.
As Baltimore's Health Commissioner, Dr. Sharfstein has been recognized
as a national leader for his efforts to protect children from unsafe
over-the-counter cough and cold medications.
And he's designed an award-winning program to ensure that Americans
with disabilities had access to prescription drugs.
Their critical work -- and the critical work of the FDA they lead --
will be part of a larger effort taken up by a new Food Safety
Working Group I'm creating. This working group will bring together
Cabinet secretaries and senior officials to advise me on how we can
upgrade our food safety laws for the 21st century; foster coordination
throughout our government; and ensure that we are not just designing
laws that will keep the American people safe, but enforcing them.
And I expect this group to report back to me
with recommendations as soon as possible.
As part of our commitment to public health, our Agriculture Department
is closing a loophole in the system to ensure that diseased cows don't
find their way into the food supply. And we're also strengthening our
food safety system and modernizing our labs with a $1 billion investment,
a portion of which will go toward significantly increasing the number
of food inspectors, helping ensure that the FDA has the staff and support
they need to protect the food we eat.
In the end, food safety is something I take seriously, not just as your
President, but as a parent. When I heard peanut products were being
contaminated earlier this year, I immediately thought of my 7-year old
daughter, Sasha, who has peanut butter sandwiches for lunch probably
three times a week. No parent should have to worry that their child
is going to get sick from their lunch. Just as no family should have to
worry that the medicines they buy will cause them harm.
Protecting the safety of our food and drugs is one of the most fundamental
responsibilities government has, and, with the outstanding team
I'm announcing today, it is a responsibility that I intend
to uphold in the months and years to come.
Thanks.